[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>There are some problems
which Western people have
in understanding
the life of Zen.
And I thought that
before we go any further,
I would devote this
program to discussing
one of the most crucial
of these problems.
It keeps coming up
as people in the West
learn about Zen or in some
way come under its influence,
whether they be painters,
or writers, or just
so-called ordinary people.
And I think the central problem
is the question of whether Zen
is a kind of capricious
do-as-you-like spontaneity
or whether it's a very
rigorous discipline?
If you read, say, a book like
"The Dharma Bums" by Jack
Kerouac, you might
get the impression
that Zen is simply
living the way you feel,
following the natural rhythm
of your own spontaneous inner
life.
On the other hand, if you
read some of the books
by Doctor Suzuki or
other authorities on Zen,
you would gather
quite the contrary,
that it is an extremely rugged
and difficult undertaking.
And what the old masters
have to say about this
is sometimes rather confusing.
For example, the old Chinese
master Lin-Chi has this to say.
In Buddhism, there is no
place for using effort.
Just be ordinary
and nothing special.
Move your bowels, pass water.
When you're hungry, eat.
When you're tired,
go and lie down.
The ignorant will laugh at me.
But the wise will understand.
And then another
old master, Mat-su,
says, In the Way--
that is the Dao--
there is nothing to
discipline oneself in.
If there were, the
completion of such discipline
would be the
destruction of the Dao.
On the other hand, if there
is no discipline at all,
one remains an ignoramus.
So they seem to say no,
it isn't a discipline.
And yet, yes, it is.
And therefore, we
outsiders, trying
to understand what's going
on, remain profoundly puzzled.
For on the one hand, we see the
kind of floating life idealized
by the old masters, the
life of cloud and water.
As I told you, a
Zen monk is called
"unsui," which means that
he drifts like a cloud
and flows like water.
But on the other hand, here
they are in their monasteries,
or, more correctly, seminaries,
living a very rugged life
indeed, under the stern
supervision of their teacher.
And so to understand
this problem,
I want to go back and look
at Zen in a social setting
so that we can understand
what kind of thing it is.
And to do that, I
want to introduce you
to some technical
ideas which Buddhism
has about the basic
nature of the universe,
so that we can understand
the function of discipline
in relation to these ideas.
Now, there is a
special word which
designates the
fundamental Buddhist
idea of the character of the
universe in which we live.
And this Sanskrit word is
the "dharmadhatudhatu."
The word "Dharma" has
many meanings in Sanskrit.
Sometimes it's doctrine.
And sometimes it's method.
But here, I would say it
means something like function.
And "dhatu" means
realm or world.
So this is the doctrine
of the whole functioning
of the universe.
And it gives us a
picture of a universe
which is completely
relativistic.
What does that mean?
If you stand on the
Earth, it seems to you
that the Moon is moving.
If you stand on the Moon, it
seems that the Earth is moving.
And there's a Zen poem which
says, empty handed I go,
and yet a spade is in my hand.
I walk on foot, and yet I'm
riding the back of an ox.
When I cross the river, the
bridge flows and the water
is still.
In other words, I don't
know what an empty hand is,
except in relation to a
hand with something in it.
I don't know what it is to
walk on foot, unless it's
in relation to some other
kind of transportation,
such as riding.
And I don't notice
motion unless it's
a relationship between
something that's still
and something that's moving.
And so where you've got
an idea of the universe
in which everything is relative
to everything else, you have,
as it were, a scheme
of interconnections
between innumerable points,
reminiscent of a spider's web
with dew on it or of the
image of Indra's net, which
is a tremendous
collection of jewels,
all linked together
in such a way
that each jewel
contains the reflection
of all the other jewels.
And in this sense
then, Buddhist doctrine
is saying that our universe
is so interconnected in all
its parts that one part of
it, so-called, can exist only
in relation to all the others.
All motion, too, is in
relation to all other motion.
It works, as we would
say in physical theory,
as a field of forces.
There is no separate
center in which
any motion or
activity originates.
All activity that occurs
at any spot, as it were,
originates over
the whole system.
And this is another meaning
of the Daoist idea of wu-wei.
You remember this term,
"wu-wei," acting or striving.
The deeper meaning of this idea
is that nothing acts of itself.
There is, as it were, no
such thing as an agent.
For action is the nature
of the whole thing.
And it, as it were, appears
in one place in relation
to stillness in
another, and so on.
Now, when you have a highly
relative system of this nature,
if you want to introduce
into it some kind of order,
as we want to introduce
order into society,
we can't base a social order
on a completely relative
conception of the world.
Because in order to have
cosmos instead of chaos,
you've got to have
some standards.
But since these standards don't
exactly exist in the universe,
we invent them.
And therefore our social
life depends, as it were,
on practicing
certain deceptions.
The Western
philosopher Vaihinger
invented the term the
philosophy of "as if."
And all social order
and communication
depends upon certain
deceptions being practiced.
And I would say these
deceptions are as follows.
The first deception is
that there are things.
That is to say that
these vortices or nexuses
in the total pattern
of the universe
are real and separate
from each other
and can be treated as such.
In other words, to describe,
to talk about the world,
we have to break it down
into various different units.
Just in the same way if
you're going to eat a chicken,
you have to chop
it up in sections.
And it's easier to eat that way.
But the cut-up fryer
doesn't come out of the egg.
It isn't found in nature.
Nor do you find eggs where
there are no chickens.
Nor do you find
chickens where there
is no environment suitable
to them, and so on.
So the pretense that things
are separable for each other
is necessary in order to
think and talk about them.
The next thing we
have to pretend
is that there are agents.
That, in other words,
the human individual
is a separate thing, originating
action and responsible for it.
But in this conception of the
completely relative universe,
action does not originate
at any particular spot.
It's a property of
the whole field,
as it were, focusing
action at these spots.
But for purposes of
social intercourse,
we have to pretend that we are
individual agents from whom
action comes.
And this pretends is enhanced
by the third thing, the rewards
and punishments.
Now, this is terribly important.
The reward for regarding
oneself as a responsible agent
and acting accordingly
is a promise
of something good coming
in the future, whether it
be in this life or whether
it be in some other life.
So that we are constantly
attracted and kept
at this game based on
these three deceptions
by living for a good thing
coming in the future.
And this, as it were,
conceals from us what
our own proverb tells us in
saying, tomorrow never comes.
We are only really
ever alive now.
And we get distracted
from living fully
now by having our
eye on the future.
Now, of course, there is
a reasonable advantage
in planning for the future.
But a person who is, as it
were, hypnotized by the future
and unable to be
awake now, really
has no use in planning
for the future
because when his plans
develop, he won't really
be able to enjoy them.
Punishments are not
only the punishments
that parents and teachers mete
out to recalcitrant children,
but we begin to get the
feeling that, for example,
things like disease or
accidents are punishments.
And that death, too,
is a punishment.
And as if that
weren't sufficient,
societies have always
invented a complicated system
of post-mortem retribution,
various heavens and hells,
whether they're
permanent or impermanent,
in which the rewards and
punishments are further
extended.
Now, this system
of deceptions-- we
could say creative deceptions.
I don't want the
word "deception"
to have a bad
favor-- is inculcated
into us in childhood, in
every culture in the world.
And it leaves a
permanent mark on us.
The mark being that
we come to believe
that these three
things are real.
Having accomplished the job of
creating a social discipline
and of getting human beings
to step to the right paces,
to dance, as it were, to the
tune played by the piper,
having done that, they
are burned into us.
And so we come to feel that
we really are separate things.
That we are agents
and sources of action.
That we are actually
responsible for what we do.
That there is that
ego thing inside us
which is the
initiator, the doer,
the will behind all action.
And so we also come to believe
in these various rewards
and punishments, whether it be
the Christian system of heaven
and hell, or whether it
be the Hindu/Buddhist
system of transmigration
or reincarnation,
living life after
life after life,
inheriting in each
following life
the karma or destiny
which we prepared
for ourselves in
the preceding one.
And this is very convenient
because then there
is no, as it were, way
of escaping the police.
There are celestial police,
as well as terrestrial police.
And by this, we
are kept in order.
But you see this stratagem
of these social deceptions
is really like a raft that
we use to cross a river.
When we have, in young
people, inculcated the order,
to go on being taken
in by these deceptions
is like picking up
the raft when you've
crossed to the opposite bank
and carrying it with you.
And it becomes a burden.
And so what Zen is
basically is a way
of freeing human beings
from those deceptions,
returning them to the
vision of the world
in its complete relativity.
Now, the training which one
goes through with a Zen teacher
shall we say lifts these
deceptions off one's mind.
Now, you might say I can
understand intellectually.
I can understand
the idea that I only
seem to be an agent,
a source of action.
And that things only seem to
be separate from each other,
but are actually interconnected.
But does this make me
feel any different inside?
And you might say, well, no,
I don't think it really does.
To understand it fully, I would
like to change the way I feel.
But here comes the crucial point
in the understanding of Zen.
On the one hand, if you set
out to change the way you feel,
that might be
called a discipline.
On the other hand,
if you decide simply
to accept the way
you feel and not
try to change your
inner feelings at all,
that might be called
letting things alone.
But here's the point.
If you have understood
clearly that you
as a separate will
or a separate ego
are a fiction, then, on the
one hand, you can't change it.
And on the other hand, you
can't do nothing about it.
Because there is no
agent, no separate doer,
either to do something about
it or to do nothing about it.
And so this situation
seems, as it were,
paralyzing if you can't do,
and if you can't don't, what's
going to happen?
But the point of this
is that that paralysis
is a realization
of the unreality
of the individual agent.
So what happens?
From this point, one ceases
to take one's self seriously.
Now, of course, there
is always a danger
in not taking the
things seriously
which society says we
should take seriously.
There's the case
of the raw youth,
the sort of juvenile
delinquent type
who is in revolt against society
and would use the experiences
and ideas of Buddhism to
justify that revolution.
And that is why the
practice in Asia
is to reveal this
point of view only
to those who are
socially mature.
And so the discipline
of the Zen school
is a safeguard for the
dangerous understanding,
or the dangerous insight,
which is there, being hatched.
And so all those
rigorous tests which
I explained, the
rigorous regimen of life,
these, as it were,
do not directly
produce the understanding.
That they are, as it were, the
guarded stockade around it.
Well, Zen, you see.
Is fundamentally an insight.
The recognition, in other
words, of the deception,
the "as ifness" of these
fundamental assumptions
about the world, which are
necessary to social life.
But then, when you don't
take them seriously anymore,
when you don't take your own
separate existence seriously
any more, then you
have, as it were,
been inwardly
relieved of the burden
of this feeling
of responsibility
which society inculcates.
So you might say that
the object of Zen
is not to obliterate
the order of society
or to get rid of
its conventions,
but to take them lightly,
to treat the conventional,
unconventionally.
And this is reflective
in the art of Zen
as where you see this Zen monk,
the Chinese [? Xuanzang ?]
treated like a kind of clown.
Or again in such a
painting as this,
which shows the great master
Hakuin, a Japanese master
of the 17th century.
This was painted by
one of his students.
And Hakuin himself
wrote a poem above it.
And here is the
man, you see, who
doesn't take himself seriously.
It says, In the assembly
of one thousand Buddhas,
the one disliked by
one thousand Buddhas.
In the company of a
multitude of demonic spirits,
the one hated by all
the demonic spirits.
Such an ugly, shabby,
dim-sighted, bald-headed one
that he is, as he
is portrayed here,
his ugliness is all the
more aggravated indeed.
Or again, art treated artlessly
in this "Vase of Flowers"
by the modern Chinese
painter [? Baishi, ?]
a great master of the
craft of painting,
but here painting almost
as naively as a child.
For this is artless art.
Or again, the sacred
treated in a secular way,
as in this painting
by [? Shingei, ?]
another 17th century Japanese
master, of the three sages,
Buddha in the center,
Lao-tze to the left,
and Confucius to the right.
You see they're treated in this
slightly humorous vein, that
doesn't take them
quite seriously.
Now in order to understand
the real element of discipline
in Buddhism, Western
students often
get phased or muddled
by a kind of what
I would call mysterious East
department, a projection of too
much excellence on
something foreign that
is not familiar to us.
And this occurs
particularly among people
who think of Buddhist
practices as producing
all kinds of fantastically
miraculous and psychic powers.
And who think that if they
go to Japan to study Zen,
they're going to come back
converted from human beings
into supermen.
Of course, in popular
superstition in Asia itself,
Buddhism is sometimes
regarded in this way.
But really, it's a
very natural thing.
And we shouldn't be
taken in by that.
And when we see works
of art such as this,
we sometimes have difficulty in
judging what kind of excellence
is in them.
What difference there is between
formal art on the one hand
and Zen art on the other,
because we are so [INAUDIBLE]
with these productions, we
belong to a foreign culture.
Now, let's take an example of
a certain piece of calligraphy.
I'm showing you now an informal
piece of Zen calligraphy
by a very great Chinese master.
We, of course, can't read it.
It doesn't mean anything to us.
And therefore, it
seems to be nothing
more than just lines on
paper, rather interestingly
and dynamically drawn.
But now this might be
compared with another piece
of calligraphy, which
I'm showing you here.
This, like the one done
by the Chinese master,
is also written by someone to
whom the written forms have
been familiar all his life.
He's practiced them again
and again and again.
And he's written
them in the same kind
of cursive, running,
informal style.
But you see, here it is.
The moon in the water, written
in English with a brush.
With the same amount
of fundamental practice
involved, informing the
letters that anybody
goes through in China or
Japan to learn to write.
But the style is the same
informality, formality,
showing the dynamics
of the brush.
So you see a great part
of the discipline of Zen
is simply the discipline
of Far Eastern culture,
whether it be the way of life,
such as the moral and ritual
principles of
Confucianism, whether it
be the art of painting, or
of writing, or of gardening,
or whatever it may be,
Zen is something that
exists in relation
to and is manifested
through the ordinary cultural
disciplines of the Far East.
But in itself, what's
Zen is is something
quite different from
these disciplines.
You see every discipline that
we undergo envisages success
in achieving certain skills.
And success is something
that we must always
think about in relation to
the individual considered
as a separate agent or will.
Do I succeed or
do I not succeed?
Zen, however, you see,
is the essential insight
that this individual
will is a fiction.
It isn't a question
of fatalism either.
Because fatalism is the idea
that the individual will
is the puppet of circumstances.
The insight of Zen is that
there is no individual will.
And therefore, Zen
is fundamentally
not a matter of success.
It's outside the range
of failure and success.
And therefore, outside the range
of discipline or no discipline.
One of the best books about
Zen that's been written
is called "Zen and the Art of
Archery" by a German professor.
And it describes there a man
who was so proficient in archery
through the study
Zen that he could
hit the bull's eye in the dark.
But a friend of mine,
the composer John Cage,
was recently traveling in Japan.
And a Japanese said
to him, something
needs to be added to that book.
We have a very, very
highly regarded Zen archery
master in Japan today
and he can't even
hit the bullseye
in broad daylight.
[MUSIC PLAYING]